                               Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352
                                                                                         www.elsevier.com/locate/red




        Precautionary savings or working longer hours?
                                          Josep Pijoan-Mas a,b
                                 a CEMFI, Casado del Alisal 5, 28014 Madrid, Spain
                                b CEPR, 90-98 Goswell Road, London EC1V 7RR, UK

                                Received 11 October 2003; revised 16 November 2005
                                         Available online 22 December 2005




Abstract
   This paper quantifies the macroeconomic implications of the lack of insurance against idiosyncratic labor
market risk. I show that in a model economy calibrated to observed individual level data, households make
ample use of work effort as a consumption smoothing mechanism. As a consequence, aggregate consump-
tion is 0.6% lower, work effort is 18% higher and labor productivity is 12% lower than they would be in
a complete markets setting. Not surprisingly, the welfare benefits of moving towards complete markets are
very large. Accounting for the whole transition to the new complete markets steady state I find the welfare
costs of market incompleteness above 16% of individual lifetime consumption.
 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

JEL classification: E21; D31; J22; C68

Keywords: Incomplete markets; Labor supply; Precautionary savings



1. Introduction

    Empirical evidence reveals a very low cross-sectional correlation between hours of work and
wages. If individuals perceive wage differences to be permanent, then the lack of correlation be-
tween hours and wages just tells us that preferences are such that the substitution and the income
effect compensate each other. However, several studies show that a big fraction of the cross-
sectional dispersion in wages is due to non-permanent stochastic factors.1 According to this,
even if the income and substitution effects compensate each other, we would expect individuals
to take advantage of better labor market opportunities and work more when more productive and


   E-mail address: pijoan@cemfi.es.
 1 For instance, Card (1991), Flodén and Lindé (2001), French (2003) or Heathcote et al. (2004).


1094-2025/$ – see front matter  2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.red.2005.11.002
                      J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352              327


enjoy leisure when less. This substitution of work effort across periods is limited by two different
factors. First, the available financial technology to transfer resources from high wage to low wage
periods, and second, individual preferences for both smooth consumption and smooth leisure. In
particular, if there existed assets whose payment was contingent on the wage perceived by in-
dividuals, then the substitution of work effort across periods would depend only on individuals
preferences.
    The purpose of this paper is to assess quantitatively the macroeconomic implications of the
lack of markets to insure against idiosyncratic labor market risk. I use a standard dynamic gen-
eral equilibrium model with heterogeneous agents where households take consumption/saving
and labor/leisure decisions. Key parameters as the intertemporal elasticities of substitution for
consumption and leisure are inferred from household level data. Then, I quantify the effects of
market incompleteness on the aggregate amount of hours worked, labor productivity, aggregate
capital, aggregate output, aggregate consumption and individual welfare.
    I find that the quantitative effects of market incompleteness are very big. For an economy
calibrated to both aggregate and individual level data from the US, the lack of a financial tech-
nology to insure against labor market risk changes dramatically the labor supply of households.
Within the model, the lack of cross-sectional correlation between hours and wages is interpreted
as households using labor supply as a mechanism to keep a smooth pattern of consumption.
This is reflected in the labor productivity. In the calibrated incomplete markets economy, labor
productivity is 19.3% lower than in the complete markets economy when holding capital fixed
and 11.5% lower when allowing capital to adjust. In addition, work effort is much higher in the
incomplete markets economy: the lack of state contingent bonds is responsible for 18% of the
observed work effort.
    The reason for these results is as follows. Under complete markets, households substitute
leisure across different states, working long hours when their market productivity is high and
working few or none hours when their market productivity is low. State contingent assets allow
consumers to transfer resources between states and keep the marginal utility of consumption
equal across states. In contrast, in the incomplete markets world households are not so willing
to substitute labor across states precisely because the ability to transfer resources between states
is limited. In the steady state equilibrium, a large fraction of low productivity workers are also
asset-poor. This type of households will supply many hours in spite of not being very productive
because their marginal utility of consumption is very high. At the same time a large fraction of
high productivity workers are asset-rich. This type of households will not supply many hours of
work because their marginal utility of consumption is very low. Ultimately, the total amount of
labor measured in efficiency units is low, the work effort high and the labor productivity low.
    Notice therefore that the mechanics driving the quantitative results of the paper is that house-
holds make ample use of their labor supply as a self-insurance mechanism in absence of state
contingent assets. Do they rely more in precautionary savings or in working long hours? For the
benchmark economy I find that precautionary savings are equal to 18.6% of aggregate capital
whereas the share of hours worked in the incomplete markets economy in excess of the amount
of hours worked in the complete markets economy is 15.2%. With a somewhat more persistent
wage process these figures become 3.7 and 20.7%. Therefore, a salient quantitative result of this
paper is that households seem to be using their work effort as a self-insurance mechanism at least
as much as they do with savings if not more, the exact measurement depending on the persistence
of the non-deterministic component of the wage process. This is consistent with empirical evi-
dence. For instance, Parker et al. (2005), using data from self-employed individuals in the PSID,
find increases in hours of work as a response to increases in uncertainty.
328                     J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


    Last, but not least, the welfare benefits associated to the introduction of markets to insure
against idiosyncratic risk are huge and vary substantially among households. The average over
the whole population of the percentage increase in lifetime consumption required by a house-
hold to be indifferent between the incomplete and the complete markets economy is 16%. When
explicitly accounting for the transition, this figure rises to 16.5%. The reason is that the tran-
sition is quite a pleasant affair because it allows households to eat their precautionary savings.
The literature on market completeness so far has emphasized the welfare benefits of eliminat-
ing fluctuations in consumption.2 The welfare gains due to the increased labor productivity have
been somehow overlooked. I find that labor productivity contributes more than 40% to the wel-
fare increase. In a very recent and complementary work, Heathcote et al. (2005) also find that
the increase in labor productivity accounts for a big share of the welfare benefits associated to
complete markets.
    There is relatively little work on the interaction of savings and work effort as self-insurance
mechanisms. In a two period model, Flodén (2005) shows theoretically the importance of the
joint determination of labor supply and savings when future wages are uncertain. In a different
type of work, Low (2005) examines the life-cycle consumption and labor allocations in a par-
tial equilibrium context and finds that for a given set of parameters, a model with endogenous
labor supply generates higher savings than an exogenous labor model. However, he does not
directly measure precautionary savings. Finally, in a general equilibrium model Marcet et al.
(2003) argue that with the explicit consideration of endogenous labor supply we may find neg-
ative precautionary savings. However, contrary to the results presented here, in their model this
goes necessarily through a lower amount of hours worked in the incomplete markets economy.
This is an important difference and I will come back to it.
    The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical set-
up. Section 3 explains how the model economy is calibrated to data. Then, the model economy
is simulated in and the results presented and discussed in Section 4. Section 5 performs some
robustness checks of the results. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

2. The model economies

  The economies analyzed in this paper are growth economies with production, populated by a
measure one of households that live forever. In this section I will only look at steady states.

2.1. Preferences

   Households derive utility from consumption and leisure. Current consumption is denoted by c
and leisure by l. Future utilities are discounted at therate β ∈ (0, 1). I write the per period utility
as u(c, l), and total expected utility at time τ as Eτ ∞  t=τ β
                                                                t−τ u(c , l ).
                                                                       t t

2.2. Production technology

   Each period households receive a shock to their efficiency units of labor ε ∈ Υ ≡ {ε1 , . . . , εnε }.
This shock is Markov with transition matrix Γ , with Γεε stating P r(εt+1 = ε  | εt = ε).
   Aggregate output Y is produced according to an aggregate neoclassical production function
F (K, L) that takes as inputs capital K and efficient units of labor L. The aggregate labor input

 2 See for example Kubler and Schmedders (2001).
                                J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                            329


comes from aggregating over all agents’ efficiency units of labor worked. Aggregate capital
results from aggregation of all assets. Capital depreciates at an exogenous rate δ ∈ (0, 1).

2.3. Market arrangements

    I distinguish between two types of market arrangements. The benchmark economy is an in-
complete markets economy. By incomplete markets I mean that there are no state contingent
markets for the household specific shock ε. Households hold assets a ∈ [a, ∞) that pay interest
at rate r. I assume that households are restricted by a lower bound on their assets holdings a.3
    In the complete markets economy households can trade Arrow securities contingent on the
realization of their own idiosyncratic shock. I denote by b (ε  ) the amount of units of the con-
sumption good to be paid to the security holder at the beginning of next period if next period
idiosyncratic shock is ε  . I denote by q(ε, ε  ) the price that a household of type ε has to pay in
the current period for such a security. A way to decentralize the economy with complete mar-
kets is by assuming there is an insurance sector with free entry that operates a costless monitoring
technology such that the realizations of the efficiency units endowments are perfectly observable.

2.4. Incomplete markets economies

   The individual state variables are the shock realization ε and the stock of assets a.4 The
problem that the household solves is:
                                                     
      v(ε, a) = max u(c, l) + β      Γεε v(ε  , a  )                                    (1)
                    c,l,a 
                                             ε
                      
       s.t.:   c + a = wε(1 − l) + (1 + r)a,                                                                            (2)
                                                     
               c ⩾ 0,         1 ⩾ l ⩾ 0 and a ⩾ a,
where r and w are the return on assets and the rental rate per efficiency units of labor. Under
certain conditions problems of this type have a solution that we denote a  = g a (ε, a), c = g c (ε, a)
and l = g l (ε, a) with an upper bound on asset holdings, a such that a ⩾ g a (ε, a) ⩾ a for all
ε ∈ Υ and all a ∈ A ≡ [a, a].5 Hereafter I will also use the more compact notation s ≡ {ε, a} and
S ≡ Υ × A.
   It is possible to construct a Markov process for the individual state variables, from the Markov
process on the shocks and from the decision rules of the agents.6 Let B be the σ -algebra gener-
ated in S by, say, its open intervals. A probability measure µ over B exhaustively describes the
economy by stating how many households are of each type. Let Q(s, B) denote the probability
that a type s = {ε, a} has of becoming of a type in B ⊂ B. Given the objects defined so far, we
can express Q as:
                    
       Q(s, B) =        Γεε Ig(ε,a)∈Ba ,
                      ε  ∈Bε


  3 This lower bound may arise endogenously as the quantity that ensures that the household is capable of repaying
its debt in all states of the world or we can just set it exogenously as a borrowing constraint. See Huggett (1993) and
Aiyagari (1994) for details.
  4 Since there is no aggregate uncertainty and since we only look at steady states, there are no aggregate state variables.
  5 See Huggett (1993) and Marcet et al. (2003) for details.
  6 See Huggett (1993) or Hopenhayn and Prescott (1992) for details.
330                            J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


where I is an indicator function that takes value 1 if its argument is true and 0 otherwise, Bε is
the projection of B in Υ and Ba is the projection of B in A. The transition function Q describes
the evolution of the economy by generating a probability measure for next period µ given a
probability measure µ today. The exact way in which this occurs is
                
      µ (B) = Q(s, B) dµ.                                                                     (3)
                 S

Definition 1. A steady state equilibrium for the incomplete markets economy is a set of functions
{v, g a , g c , g l }, a measure of households µ, and a pair of prices {w, r} such that:

(1) given a pair of prices {w, r}, the functions {v, g a , g c , g l } solve the households’ decision
    problem;
(2) prices are given by marginal productivities, r = FK (K/L) − δ and        w = FL (K/L);
(3) factor inputs are obtained aggregating over households, L = ε(1 − g l ) dµ and K =
       g a dµ;                                         
(4) the measure of households is stationary, µ(B) = S Q(s, B) dµ and
(5) by virtue of the Walras law, the aggregate resource constraint of the economy is automatically
    satisfied, C + K  = F (K, L) + (1 − δ)K.

2.5. Complete markets economies

   Under complete markets, the individual level state variables are the realization of the idio-
syncratic shock ε and the income obtained from the corresponding Arrow security b(ε). The
problem that the household solves is:
                                                             
                                                           
      v ε, b(ε) = max u(c, l) + β       Γεε v ε  , b (ε  )                               (4)
                          c,l,b (ε  )
                                                     ε
                   
      s.t.:   c+           q(ε, ε  )b (ε  ) = wε(1 − l) + b(ε),                               (5)
                     ε
              c⩾0          and 1 ⩾ l ⩾ 0.
The solution to this problem is given by the policy functions b (ε  ) = g b (ε, b(ε), ε  ), c =
g c (ε, b(ε)) and l = g l (ε, b(ε)).
     For a household of type {ε, b(ε)} we have an Euler equation for each state contingent bond
b (ε  ):
                       Γεε
      uc (c, l) = β              uc (c , l  )   ∀ε  ∈ Υ
                      q(ε, ε  )
where l is given by the intratemporal first order condition:
      uc (c, l)wε = ul (c, l).                                                                   (6)
Imposing equilibrium in the insurance market q(ε, ε  ) = (1 + r)−1 Γεε the Euler equations can
be rewritten as:
      uc (c, l) = β(1 + r) uc (c , l  )         ∀ε  ∈ Υ,
                                    J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                      331


which tells us that households will choose their purchases of state contingent bonds such that
the next period marginal utilities of consumption are equalized across states.7 Therefore, for a
steady state equilibrium with a balanced growth path to exist we will require β(1 + r) = 1.8 This
condition further simplifies the Euler equations for the state contingent bonds:
       uc (c, l) = uc (c , l  )         ∀ε  ∈ Υ.
This is the standard complete markets relationship. Households choose b (ε  ) such that the mar-
ginal utility of consumption is equalized across different states of the world and different points
in time.

Definition 2. A steady state equilibrium for the complete markets economy is a set of functions
{v, g b , g c , g l }, a measure of households µ, a pair of prices {w, r} and a pricing function q(ε, ε  )
such that:

(1) given a pair of prices {w, r} and the pricing function q(ε, ε  ), the functions {v, g b , g c , g l }
    solve the households’ decision problem;
(2) prices are given by marginal productivities, r = FK (K/L) − δ and      w = FlL (K/L);
(3) factor inputs
                    are   obtained    aggregating   over households, L =  ε(1 − g (ε, b(ε))) dµ and
    K=             q(ε, ε  )g b (ε, b(ε), ε  ) dµ;
                ε
(4) the pricing function q(ε, ε  ) satisfies the no-arbitrage condition in the insurance industry,
    q(ε, ε  ) = (1 + r)−1 Γεε ;
(5) the steady state condition β(1 + r) = 1 holds; and
(6) by virtue of the Walras law, the aggregate resource constraint of the economy is automatically
    satisfied, C + K  = F (K, L) + (1 − δ)K.

    Unlike the incomplete market economy, the steady state equilibrium is not unique. There is
a unique set of prices r, w and q(ε, ε  ) and capital labor ratio K/L pinned down by the equi-
librium conditions (2), (4) and (5). Given a unique set of prices, condition (1) implies a unique
set of functions {v, g b , g c , g l } and therefore the optimal individual behavior is also uniquely
determined. However, for general types of preferences, condition (3) implies that different dis-
tributions of households µ generate different pairs of aggregate capital K and aggregate labor L
consistent with the unique capital to labor ratio.9 Indeed, there are potentially infinite different
distributions µ compatible with the unique equilibrium capital to labor ratio.10 These different
distributions will generate different levels of aggregate capital and labor and therefore of hours
worked, output and aggregate consumption. Therefore, contrary to an economy without valued

 7 Or the consumption level itself if consumption and leisure are separable in the utility function.
 8 Notice that if β(1 + r) > 1, we would need

       uc (c, l) > uc (c , l  )    ∀ε ∈ Υ

which asks for consumption (and therefore assets) to grow forever. If β(1 + r) < 1, the opposite would be true.
 9 In particular, with valued leisure and heterogeneous and time-changing endowments of labor productivity, Gorman
(1953) aggregation result does not hold: homotheticity of preferences is not a sufficient condition for aggregation. See
Maliar and Maliar (2003) for details.
10 The lack of uniqueness is broken by the fact that the steady state condition βR = 1 implies that in equilibrium
individual assets may lay at any point in the unbounded set [a, ∞) and therefore the state space described by the set S is
not compact. Therefore, Theorem 2 in Hopenhayn and Prescott (1992) does not hold.
332                        J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


leisure, we cannot characterize the solution to the complete markets economy by use of a rep-
resentative agent. When solving for the complete markets economy we need to make explicit
which equilibrium we choose.

3. Calibration

   The length of the model period is set equal to one year. The calibration strategy I pursue is
the following. Given an exogenous process for the efficiency endowment ε, I choose the model
parameters such that in the steady state equilibrium the incomplete markets economy matches
some characteristics of both aggregate and individual level data. This implies solving for the
equilibrium as many times as needed until the statistics from data are matched.11 In a sense, this
calibration strategy can be seen as an exactly identified simulated method of moments estimation.
Then, given these parameters the complete markets economies are solved. In the remaining of
this section I give more details about this process.

3.1. The process for individual wages

   The process for market productivity shocks ε is determined by an nε ×1 vector of endowments
Υ and an nε × nε transition matrix Γ . The first step for the calibration is to give values to the
parameters of this process by looking at data on wages.
   The model is set such that there is no fixed heterogeneity. In this model economy all house-
holds will be at some point at the top and at some other point at the bottom of the wage
distribution. If we mapped the actual distribution of wages into the model, we would be im-
posing for instance that a computer engineer may end up being as productive as an assembly line
worker (and vice versa). The large variance of earnings observed in data does not seem to re-
flect actual uncertainty faced by people. Therefore, instead of calibrating the model productivity
process to the overall dispersion of the observed wage distribution I will take as reference the
wage distribution net of fixed heterogeneity.
   There are several articles estimating processes for wages. Let us call ωi,t the log of the real
hourly wage at t earned by individual i. A typical set-up is as follows:
                                                            
       ωi,t = γ xi,t + αi + zi,t + υi,t with υi,t ∼ N 0, συ2
where xi,t is a vector of observable characteristics, αi reflects an individual i unobserved fixed
component, υi,t may reflect measurement error and zi,t is an stochastic time changing individual
specific component that evolves as follows:
                                                
      zi,t = ρzi,t−1 + ηi,t with ηi,t ∼ N 0, ση2 .
This idiosyncratic component z is the one that corresponds to the (log of the) model productivity
term ε.
   Estimates of this idiosyncratic component vary. Using PSID data, Flodén and Lindé (2001)
estimate ρ = 0.92 and ση = 0.21. Also using PSID data French (2003) finds a somewhat more
persistent process with ρ = 0.977 and ση = 0.12. French estimate implies also a slightly more

11 Other recent articles that follow a similar calibration strategy in a similar context are Castañeda et al. (2003) and
Heathcote et al. (2004).
                           J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                             333


volatile idiosyncratic component for wages, with σz = 0.56, whereas Flodén and Lindé parame-
ters imply σz = 0.54.12
   I will parameterize the process for ε by discretizing each of these two estimations into a seven-
state Markov chain following the methodology described by Tauchen (1986). I will call E0 the
economy that arises from the discretization of the process estimated by Flodén and Lindé (2001).
In Section 5.3, I will also provide results for the economy that arises from the discretization of
the more persistent process estimated by French (2003).

3.2. The calibration in equilibrium

   The production function is the standard Cobb–Douglas, which is consistent with the non-
trended factor shares observed in US data for the post-war years:
       F (K, L) = K 1−θ Lθ .
The chosen utility function is:
                  c1−σ − 1       l 1−ν − 1
       u(c, l) =            +λ             .
                    1−σ             1−ν
It gives enough parameters to have distinct intertemporal elasticities of substitution for consump-
tion and leisure which let us match observed individual behavior.13 With this utility function, the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption is given by 1/σ , the intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution of leisure by 1/ν and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of labor by
    l
ν(1−l) .
     There are 6 parameters we want to pin down: the preference parameters β, σ , ν, λ and the
technology parameters θ and δ.14 I will calibrate these values so that in equilibrium the incom-
plete markets economy matches some statistics from data, taking three targets from aggregate
data and three targets from household survey data.
     The three targets from aggregate data are quite standard choices. I will use the capital to
output ratio, the ratio of investment to output and the labor share. These statistics should mainly
pin down the time discount factor β, the depreciation rate δ and the labor share parameter θ .
I pick a value of 3.0 for the capital labor ratio, a value of 0.25 for the investment output ratio
and a labor share of 0.64. They are all fairly common choices for general equilibrium model
economies.
     I use the Current Population Survey (CPS) for 2002 to compute the three targets from cross-
sectional household survey data as follows.15 First, I choose the average number of hours worked
in the sample which is roughly 1/3 of available time. Second, I use the cross-sectional correlation
of wages with hours. Third, I target the cross-sectional volatility of hours worked. These three

12 These are not the only studies estimating a process for the idiosyncratic and stochastic component of wages by use of
PSID data. Earlier work by Card (1991) provides a less persistent process with ρ = 0.89. Heathcote et al. (2004) obtain
ρ = 0.94.
13 Notice however that σ = 1 is inconsistent with balanced growth path in a representative agent economy with positive
growth.
14 The lower level on asset holdings a is set equal to the natural borrowing limit. Since in this model there are no
transfers and labor income depends on hours supplied the natural borrowing limit turns out to be zero. Less stringent
borrowing limits are explored in Section 5.1.
15 I actually use the 2002 NBER Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups sub-sample of the CPS data set, which contains the
4th and 8th month interviews of every household.
334                          J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


                         Table 1
                         Calibration targets and model parameters
                         Parameter                    Target                                Value
                         σ                            corr(h, ε) = 0.02                     1.458
                         ν                            cv(h) = 0.22                          2.833
                         λ                            H = 0.33                              0.856
                         β                            K/Y = 3.00                            0.945
                         θ                            wL/Y = 0.64                           0.640
                         δ                            I /Y = 0.25                           0.083


statistics will pin down the three parameters of the utility function. In doing so I follow Heathcote
et al. (2004).16 To accord with the model lack of deterministic heterogeneity, I clean hours and
wages from fixed heterogeneity. I regress out education, age, sex and race from wages and hours
and compute (a) the correlation of the residual of hours with the residual of wages and (2) the
coefficient of variation of the residual of hours. The correlation turns out to be a very small
0.02.17 The coefficient of variation of hours is 0.22.
    Table 1 contains the parameter values consistent with a steady state equilibrium displaying
these six properties from data.18 We obtain σ = 1.458 and ν = 2.833. The former value implies
an intertemporal elasticity of substitution for consumption of 0.69, a value in line with many
macroeconomic papers. The latter value implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution for
leisure equal to 0.35 and for labor equal to 0.72 (when evaluated at its average). Empirical esti-
mates of the intertemporal elasticity of labor using micro data on male household heads tend to
be lower than this number. However, according to Domeij and Flodén (2005) estimates that do
not take into account borrowing constraints may be seriously downward biased. These authors,
when controlling for borrowing constraints, estimate an elasticity of labor around 0.59.19
    As an assessment of this model economy, in Table 2, I display some distributional statistics
and compare them to data. In the first panel, I report the statistics for hours. The coefficient of
variation of hours has been calibrated so the model and data coincide. The rest of the distribution
has not. We see that the model generates an average amount of hours worked at each quintile of
the distribution of hours very close to data. The second panel reports some statistics for the dis-
tribution of labor earnings. I use data from two different sources: the CPS, computed by myself,
and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), quoted from Budría et al. (2002). The differences
between the two data sources are very large. There is a number of reasons that generate differ-
ences between the CPS and the SCF sources. First, the CPS is individual-based whereas the SCF
is household-based. Second, the SCF oversamples rich households to better capture the upper tail
of the income distribution. In addition, my own treatment of the CPS data in order to construct
measurements comparable to the magnitudes in the model necessarily generates big differences.

16 However, these authors target the volatility of the change in hours instead of the volatility of levels. Both choices
gives a measure of the size of fluctuations in leisure that households face. The choice of targeting the change in hours is
not available with the CPS. When looking for a source of labor market data one faces a trade-off between the PSID and
the CPS. The former is a long panel but the latter is much larger and its sampling constantly redesigned in order to be
representative of the US population.
17 Heathcote et al. (2004) also report a value of 0.02 for the period 1967–1996 using PSID data.
18 Notice that since the parameters are calibrated to equilibrium statistics, all of them affect all calibration targets.
However, in the text I highlight the statistic that is most influenced by each parameter.
19 In Section 5.1, I show that when allowing households to hold negative net worth, the calibrated elasticity of labor
reaches 0.59. See Section 5.2 for a further discussion on this issue and robustness checks for ν.
                                J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                                     335


Table 2
Distributional statistics
Variable                 cv             Gini          q1                q2                q3               q4               q5
Hours
  Model E0               0.22           0.11            0.21             0.31              0.35            0.37             0.40
  Data (CPS)             0.22           0.11            0.24             0.31              0.33            0.35             0.42
Earnings
  Model E0               0.65           0.33           7.3%             12.4%             17.2%            23.0%            40.1%
  Data (CPS)             0.56           0.29           7.9%             13.7%             18.0%            23.3%            37.1%
  Data (SCF)             2.65           0.61          −0.2%              4.0%             13.0%            22.9%            60.2%
Wealth
  Model E0               1.37           0.65           0.1%              2.2%              9.2%            23.1%            65.4%
  Data (SCF)             6.53           0.80          −0.3%              1.3%              5.0%            12.2%            81.7%
Notes. cv refers to coefficient of variation. q1 , . . . , q5 refer, for earnings and wealth, to the share held by all people in the
corresponding quintile with respect to the total. However, for hours it is the average number of hours worked by people
in the corresponding quintile. Statistics from SCF correspond to the 1998 wave and are quoted from Budría et al. (2002).
Statistics from SCF correspond to the 2002 wave.




First, the statistics from CPS are cleaned from fixed heterogeneity in order to be comparable with
the model, whereas the statistics from SCF are not. Second, the sample selection for the CPS is
restricted to working-age individuals who supply positive hours in 2002 whereas the SCF con-
tains the whole population. Comparing the model to data, we observe that the model does a very
good job in replicating the distribution of labor earnings from the CPS. The average earnings at
each quintile are very similar. The main difference arises in the top quintile, which earn more
labor income in the model. This is reflected in the coefficient of variation and the Gini index,
which are bigger for the model economy. Of course, and by construction, the model falls short
from the observed concentration of the earnings distribution as measured in the SCF. Finally,
due to the lack of fixed heterogeneity the overall concentration of the wealth distribution is much
lower than in data. The model generates a Gini index for the wealth distribution equal to 0.65
whereas the equivalent statistics in the SCF is 0.80.


4. Results


   The basic economic experiment performed in this paper is the comparison of allocations be-
tween the steady state equilibrium of an incomplete markets economy calibrated to reproduce
key statistics from data and the allocations of the steady state equilibrium of a complete markets
counterpart. However, as stated in Section 2.5, there are multiple complete markets economies
to use. I will solve for the complete markets economy that arises after a full transition from the
incomplete markets economy to the new complete markets steady state equilibrium. Addition-
ally, in Section 5.4, I also present results for the complete markets economy that corresponds to
an equal-weight planner’s problem.20


20 See Appendices A.1 and A.2 for details on how to solve for these two complete markets economies.
336                         J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


4.1. Aggregate hours and labor productivity

   The complete and incomplete markets economies imply distinctly different household’s be-
havior in the labor market. A first evidence of this are the disparate measures of aggregate hours
worked and aggregate labor in the different model economies. In Table 3 we see that aggregate
hours worked are much higher in the incomplete markets economy (IM) than in its complete
markets counterpart (CM). In the incomplete markets economy aggregate hours are calibrated
to reproduce the 0.33 value found in data. In the complete markets economy aggregate hours
equal 0.28, which implies that aggregate hours worked in the incomplete markets economy are
about 18% higher than they would be in a world with state contingent assets.
   In contrast to this result, aggregate labor is lower in the incomplete markets economy. Table 3
shows that aggregate labor is 4.7% lower in the incomplete markets economy. The fact that hours
worked are higher and aggregate labor is lower in the incomplete markets economy indicates that
the average efficiency per hour worked must be lower in the incomplete markets economy. In-
deed, we observe this in the third column of Table 3. The average amount of efficiency labor units
per hour worked in the incomplete markets economy is 1.00 whereas it is 1.24 in the complete
markets economy: average efficiency per hour worked is 19.3% lower under incomplete mar-
kets. Additionally, we also see in Table 3 that the total productivity per hour worked, measured
as output per hour, is markedly lower in the incomplete markets economy, 11.5% less.
   The reasons for these results are quite straightforward. Under complete markets, households
base the variation of hours worked across states entirely on the variation of efficiency units.
The first order condition for the labor decision is given by Eq. (6). In the complete markets
economy the consumption level is the same regardless of the realization of ε. Therefore, l adjusts
to movements on ε alone. In other words: the realization of the idiosyncratic shock does not
carry any wealth effect and the variations of hours worked respond only to the substitution effect.
However, under incomplete markets the realization of the shock does change consumption levels.
Low ε implies low consumption and therefore high marginal utility of consumption. Therefore,
a household with low ε chooses to work more in the incomplete markets economy due to the
high value of the wage obtained. This effect is strengthened when the idiosyncratic shocks are
persistent. Overall, the average productivity per hour worked is lower in the incomplete markets
economy because labor is used to smooth consumption fluctuations across states and therefore
does not fully respond to variations in productivity.
   To illustrate this latter point, let us look at the graphical counterpart of Eq. (6). In Fig. 1,
I plot the policy function for hours worked in the incomplete markets economy.21 We observe
that, other things equal, work effort increases with the efficiency endowment and decreases with
wealth. However, as shown in Table 4, the correlation between efficiency units and assets is high,


                         Table 3
                         Aggregate labor and productivity
                                                   H            L            L/H               Y /H
                         IM economy                0.33         0.33         1.00              3.50
                         CM economy                0.28         0.35         1.24              3.96
                         IM/CM − 1 (%)             18.0         −4.7         −19.3             −11.5



21 In terms of the policy functions defined in Section 2.4 it corresponds to 1 − g l (ε, a).
                           J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                             337




                             Fig. 1. Policy functions for hours under incomplete markets.
Note. Productivity shocks are labelled such that ε7 > ε4 > ε1 . Hours are reported as fraction of total available time.
Assets are reported in levels, where 1.15 corresponds to the (per capita) output of the economy.


                                 Table 4
                                 Correlations
                                                        corr(a, ε)          corr(h, ε)
                                 IM economy             0.51                0.02
                                 CM economy             0.00                0.74



0.51. This means that in equilibrium good shocks are associated to high wealth and bad shocks
to low wealth. The reason behind this is that shocks are very persistent. Households receive
long series of good or bad shocks, which make them accumulate or deplete wealth. Then, in
equilibrium, we observe that many of the very productive households are also wealth rich and
therefore they do not work much because the marginal value of each unit of consumption is low.
On the other hand, we observe that many of the low productive households are also wealth poor,
supplying a lot of hours in spite of their low return because the marginal value of an extra unit
of consumption is very high for them. This results in a low correlation of wages and hours and
a low ratio of aggregate units of labor to aggregate hours.22 In contrast, under complete markets
the correlation between wealth and hours worked is zero and the correlation between hours and
labor productivity is as high as 0.74.
   Marcet et al. (2003), in a related work, hold that hours worked are lower under incomplete
markets. In a similar model, they set up household uncertainty as a work opportunity. Households
have a choice of hours only if given a (stochastic) work opportunity. These authors find that the
number of hours worked will be smaller in an incomplete markets economy because employed
workers are richer in the incomplete markets world than in a complete markets economy and
therefore consume more leisure. Of course, the unemployed are poorer but they do not supply
hours of work. Their setting, therefore, does not allow for substitution of labor across different
states of the world. This is the main channel operating here: complete markets allow households
to work many hours when the market return is high and work few or none when the market return

22 The exact amount in which this happens is chosen by targeting the 0.02 value in data of the correlation between hours
and wages.
338                         J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


is low. The substitution of labor across states in the complete markets economies makes the
average return per hour worked much higher and therefore lifetime income higher for everybody.
Households are hence richer in the complete markets economies and this wealth effect makes
them demand more leisure.

4.2. Precautionary savings or working longer hours?

    The first column in Table 5 reports precautionary savings.23 Precautionary savings equals
18.6%, which means that 18.6% of aggregate capital is there due to the lack of markets to insure
against idiosyncratic risk.24 Is this a big or a small number? In the second column of Table 5
I report a similar statistic but instead of measuring it over aggregate capital I do it over the
capital to labor ratio. This would be the type of precautionary savings captured by models without
labor choice since it directly arises from the lower marginal product of capital in the incomplete
markets economy. In a model without labor choice, the whole difference between capital labor
ratios would be imputed to aggregate capital. We can see that precautionary savings measured
over capital labor ratios are higher, up to 22.4%. This is the type of effect highlighted by Aiyagari
(1994) and it is solely due to the uninsurable variation of labor earnings when the markets are
incomplete.25
    Finally in the third column of Table 5, I report an equivalent statistic computed over aggregate
hours. That is to say, I report the fraction of hours worked in the incomplete markets economy in
excess of the hours worked in the complete markets counterpart. I find that 15.2% of the hours
worked in the incomplete markets economy are due to lack of insurance. Therefore, we observe
that precautionary hours are in the same order of magnitude as precautionary savings albeit
slightly smaller; households seem to be using work effort as much as savings in order to smooth
their consumption profiles. Incidentally, note that the use of work effort as an instrument to avoid
fluctuations in consumption is different from the concept of precautionary hours highlighted by
Flodén (2005). This author refers to the use of hours of work before uncertainty is realized. In
our model economy individuals choose work effort once they know the realization of their labor
market productivity.

                                  Table 5
                                  Precautionary savings and precautionary hours
                                                           K           K/L           H
                                  1 − CM/IM (%)            18.6        22.4          15.2


23 I measure precautionary savings as the difference between aggregate capital in the incomplete markets economy and
aggregate capital in a complete markets economy, relative to aggregate capital in the incomplete markets economy. This
measure can be interpreted as the fraction of capital in the incomplete markets economy that is there due to the lack of
state contingent markets.
24 Within the general equilibrium literature, measurements of precautionary savings range from 3% to more than 100%
of total wealth. The wide range of estimates is explained by the size and persistence of the non-permanent component of
the idiosyncratic uncertainty in the earnings process that different authors consider. See Díaz et al. (2003) and references
therein for details.
25 According to the literature of precautionary savings in partial equilibrium it is actually the interaction of uncertainty
with the convexity of the marginal utility what matters. However, with borrowing constraints we obtain precautionary
savings regardless of the sign of the third derivative of the utility function. See Aiyagari (1994) or Huggett and Ospina
(2001) for details.
                       J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352             339


4.3. The size of the economy

    The standard result that incomplete markets economies are always bigger in terms of both
capital and output (as pointed out by Huggett, 1993 or Aiyagari, 1994) is obtained for economies
where labor is exogenous and thus it does not change when we modify either the market struc-
ture or the amount of uncertainty. Therefore, a higher capital to labor ratio necessarily implies
higher aggregate capital and thence higher aggregate output and higher aggregate consumption.
However, once we allow households to adjust labor supply, the higher capital to labor ratio under
incomplete markets does not necessarily lead to a higher aggregate capital. And higher aggregate
capital does not necessarily lead to higher output either. Furthermore, higher aggregate output
does not necessarily imply higher aggregate consumption.
    Table 6 reports the aggregate allocations of the economy. We see that aggregate output is 4.4%
larger under the incomplete markets case. However, as it will be shown in Section 5.3, we can
easily parameterize an incomplete markets economy that generates aggregate output smaller than
in its complete markets counterpart. The change in aggregate output can be decomposed into its
two determinants, aggregate labor and aggregate capital. We have already seen that aggregate
labor is smaller and aggregate capital is bigger in the incomplete markets economies.
    Finally, in spite of larger aggregate output, the incomplete markets economy displays an
amount of aggregate consumption slightly below what is obtained in the complete markets set-up.
Does this mean that the incomplete markets economy is dynamically inefficient? This cannot be
the case since the interest rate is positive. What happens is the following. Steady state consump-
tion C is equal to F (K, L) − δK. With exogenous labor supply, the fact that the incomplete
markets economy has more capital and lower consumption necessarily implies that FK < δ and
therefore that the economy is dynamically inefficient. However, with endogenous labor a fall
in aggregate labor L can make output increase less than δK while still having FK > δ. This is
indeed what happens.

4.4. Welfare gains

   In these type of economies, households have two costly margins of adjustment in order to
smooth their consumption profiles. On the one hand, they can save in advance so that when bad
times come there is a buffer stock of assets to avoid large drops in consumption. Building pre-
cautionary savings is costly because it implies saving at an interest rate lower than the subjective
time discount rate. On the other hand, households can adjust their work effort when a shock is
realized. If wages fall, the household can prevent consumption from falling too much by working
additional hours and thus making sure that labor income does not suffer so much. This is costly
because it implies working longer hours precisely when the household is less productive. A nat-
ural quantitative question in this framework is whether these costs are big. Or in other words, is
the absence of state contingent bonds to trade the idiosyncratic labor market risk very costly?

                     Table 6
                     The size of the economy
                                               Y       C            K           L
                     IM economy                1.16    0.87         3.47        0.33
                     CM economy                1.11    0.87         2.83        0.35
                     IM/CM − 1 (%)             4.4     −0.6         22.8        −4.7
340                        J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


    To answer this question I compute the percentage consumption increase that we should give
forever to every individual in the incomplete markets world for her to be indifferent between the
incomplete markets world and waking up in a complete markets economy in steady state with the
same level of assets and labor market productivity. Of course, these welfare measure will differ
heavily among households. Households with very few assets are badly self-insured, so we should
expected them to obtain sizeable gains of complete markets. The reason is double. First, they will
be able to eliminate fluctuations in consumption. This is the pure insurance effect. Second, they
will be able to work long hours when more productive and enjoy leisure when less productive.
These are the gains of a more efficient allocation of work effort. In contrast, households with
large stocks of asset are very well self-insured in the incomplete markets economy. They are not
expected to gain much from moving into a world with insurance markets because their consump-
tion profiles are already quite smooth and because their work effort already tracks productivity.
However, the world with state contingent bonds differs from the incomplete markets economy
not only in the insurance technology, but also in the equilibrium prices. Precisely, since the capi-
tal to labor ratio is smaller in the complete markets economy, the interest rate will be higher and
the wage rate lower than in the incomplete markets economy. Therefore, in contrast to the partial
equilibrium effects, asset-rich households benefit more from moving to complete markets than
asset-poor households because the change in prices is beneficial to them. Hence, the relative size
of the partial equilibrium effects and the price effect will determine whether the welfare costs of
market incompleteness are increasing or falling with the level of assets.
    In order to decompose the welfare gains into their partial equilibrium and their price compo-
nents, I will define a second measure of welfare change. I solve the household problem under
incomplete markets for the pair of prices of complete markets. Then, I look for the relative in-
crease in consumption to be given to every individual of this world such that they are indifferent
with the complete markets economy. This welfare measure gives the partial equilibrium effect.
Figure 2 plots individual welfare gains against assets for three different labor market produc-
tivity shocks. Panel (a) shows total welfare increase whereas panel (b) only shows the partial
equilibrium component. The difference between them corresponds to the price effect. As stated
above, the welfare benefits of complete markets solely due to partial equilibrium effects are the
biggest for the asset poor and decrease monotonically with the level of assets. Not shown in
the graphs, the welfare benefits due to the change in prices increase monotonically with assets.




                  (a) overall welfare gains                               (b) partial equilibrium component

                                                 Fig. 2. Welfare gains.
Note. Productivity shocks are labelled such that ε7 > ε4 > ε1 . Consumption increase is the relative increase in consump-
tion. Assets are reported in levels, where 1.15 corresponds to the (per capita) output of the economy.
                           J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                              341


The overall effect is a combination of both. For instance, for the lowest realization of the shock,
ε1 , the partial equilibrium components dominate for low levels of assets as the welfare gains of
complete markets decrease with assets. However, there is a point where the individual is quite
well self-insured and the change in prices is more important: from here onwards welfare gains of
complete markets increase with assets.
    The actual values of these welfare gains are impressive. For instance, households with no
assets and the lowest market productivity enjoy a welfare increase in complete markets equivalent
to a 35% increase in consumption. Yet, for this type of individuals the change in prices implies
income losses; without the price effect their welfare gains would be as large as 47%. Table 7
reports the average over the whole population of these welfare gains: they turn out to be as big as
16.1%. Looking at the decomposition of the welfare gains, the average of the partial equilibrium
component is 15.2% and the average of the price component is 0.9%. Therefore, the bulk of the
aggregate welfare gains of complete markets is due to its partial equilibrium effects, with the
welfare benefits due to the change in prices being more or less offset among individuals.
    It is interesting to note the small size of the price component. This is the result of two coun-
teracting forces. First, the price changes (interest rate increase and wage decrease) imply shifting
resources from low consumption individuals to high consumption individuals. Low consump-
tion individuals own few assets and are intensive in labor income. Therefore the price change
decreases the share of output they receive. In contrast, high consumption individuals are asset
rich and work very little. Therefore, they benefit with the price changes. Since marginal util-
ity is decreasing in consumption, this redistribution of resources generates, on average, welfare
losses.26 Second, the change in prices also accounts for the change in aggregate allocations of
the economy. The complete markets economy allows larger aggregate consumption and leisure.
This brings welfare gains. As seen, these two effects turn out to offset each other. This result adds
value to the work by Heathcote et al. (2005). In a complementary work, they obtain analytical
expressions for the aggregate welfare gains of introducing insurance markets. The cost they pay
is that their results only account for the partial equilibrium component. However, what we see is
that for the aggregate welfare gains, the general equilibrium effect hardly matters.


Table 7
Individual welfare gains (%)
                               Average equivalent variation of consumption
                               all             q1               q2                q3               q4               q5
Full model                     16.1            11.5             12.5              14.6             16.8             25.2
  PE component                 15.2            5.5              10.0             13.8              18.4             28.5
  GE component                  0.9           −9.1              −5.9             −1.7               4.3             16.9
Fixed hours                     9.3             6.3               7.0              8.3              9.9             14.8
  PE component                  9.4            3.4               5.8              8.2              11.2             18.4
  GE component                 −0.1           −7.2              −4.5             −1.3               2.7              9.6
Transition                     16.5            12.9             13.9              14.6             17.5             23.5
Notes. all refers to the average over the whole population. q1 , . . . , q5 refer to the average within the corresponding
quintile. PE and GE mean partial and general equilibrium respectively.


26 This idea is emphasized by Dávila et al. (2005), who show that due to distributional effects the actual level of
aggregate capital in an incomplete markets economy is too low.
342                        J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


   A further question about the welfare gains is the relative importance of the use of labor as a
self-insurance mechanism. Recall that the productivity gains in the complete markets economy
are due to the fact that households use their work effort to exploit the variance in labor market
productivity. In order to measure the relative importance of labor flexibility, I perform the follow-
ing experiment. I take the households in the incomplete markets economy and force all of them
to work a fixed amount of time equal to the calibrated average number of hours, 0.33. I solve for
the new steady state equilibrium. Then, I compute the same welfare measures as before, with the
complete markets economy being also forced to have a fixed labor equal to the average of 0.33.
How big are the welfare gains from moving to the complete markets world? Table 7 reports this
figure: on average, 9.3%. This implies that a 42% of the welfare gain of complete markets is due
to the possibility of adjusting labor supply. As before, we can separate the welfare gains into a
partial equilibrium and a price component. In the fixed labor model this is particularly informa-
tive because the partial equilibrium component is solely due to insurance, with no possibility of
labor reallocation. I find the average of the partial equilibrium gains to be equal to 9.4%. There-
fore, 62% of the partial equilibrium gains are due to the pure insurance effect and 38% are due
to the labor reallocation opportunities. Hence, I conclude that the substitution of hours of work
across states in the complete markets setting is a major source of welfare improvement.


4.5. The transition


    The comparison between steady states can be complemented by looking at how the econ-
omy evolves from the incomplete markets setting to the steady state equilibrium with complete
markets. In Appendix A.2, I explain how to solve for the transition.
    In Fig. 3, I show the simulated transition paths for the capital to labor ratio, aggregate output,
aggregate capital, aggregate labor, aggregate consumption and aggregate hours of work. We ob-
serve that in period t = 1, once we allow households to trade Arrow securities, the capital to labor
ratio jumps up. Then it declines gradually to its new steady state value. The reason is that at t = 1
capital is predetermined and only aggregate labor adjusts. As the transition goes on, aggregate
capital falls to its new steady state level and aggregate labor increases. It is also important to note
that at t = 1 consumption jumps up and gradually declines to its new steady state level.27 This is
particularly good news: since in the new steady state aggregate capital will be lower, some extra
consumption can be afforded during the transition. Then, once the economy stabilizes in the new
steady state, aggregate consumption remains slightly above its initial value. In contrast, we ob-
serve that work effort is higher at the beginning of the transition and it gradually declines to its
complete markets steady state level. Therefore, leisure during the transition is lower than in the
final steady state. Hence, in terms of welfare, accounting for the transition implies considering a
time period where consumption is higher and leisure lower than in the final steady state. Which
of these effects prevails? In the third row of the first panel in Table 7, I report the average over the
whole population and within each quintile of the welfare increase when explicitly accounting for
the transition. I find this average to be equal to 16.5% of consumption in the incomplete markets
economy. This is 0.4 percentage points more.


27 Nonetheless, it falls slightly below its incomplete markets level for a while, tracking the u-shaped profile of output.
                           J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                              343




                                        Fig. 3. Transition of aggregate variables.
Note. Variables are scaled relative to their level in the incomplete markets economy. The dashed line serves as reference
for the incomplete markets level.



5. Robustness

   In this section, I want to show that, although there may be important quantitative adjustments,
the qualitative results prevail once we change certain parameters of the model. In Section 5.1,
I show that relaxing the borrowing constraints of households in the incomplete markets econ-
omy does not affect the results. This is an important exercise since the tightness of borrowing
constraints is a crucial determinant of the available financial trades for an incomplete markets
economy. Next, in Section 5.2, I look at changes in ν, the parameter driving the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution of labor. I do so because this is a parameter value over which there are
multiple estimates that are somewhat different from the values chosen in this paper. With a more
inelastic labor supply the quantitative results are less impressive. However, changes in ν do not
modify the main qualitative results of the paper. In Section 5.3, I use a more persistent wage
process. Finally, in Section 5.4, I solve for a different complete markets economy and for the
representative agent economy.

5.1. The borrowing constraints

   A possible objection to the results shown so far is that allowing households to borrow in-
creases the ability to move resources from high wage periods to low wage periods and therefore
may diminish the use of hours as a smoothing mechanism. To probe this issue, I calibrate a new
344                       J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352


Table 8
Calibration targets and model parameters
Parameter            Target                      Calibrated value
                                                 Model E0             a = −1.00Y             ν = 8.0            HP
σ                    corr(h, ε) = 0.02           1.458                1.514                  1.412              0.992
ν                    cv(h) = 0.22                2.833                3.459                  8.000              1.290
λ                    H = 0.33                    0.856                0.674                  0.110              1.545
β                    K/Y = 3.00                  0.945                0.948                  0.948              0.955
θ                    wL/Y = 0.64                 0.640                0.640                  0.640              0.640
δ                    I /Y = 0.25                 0.083                0.083                  0.083              0.083
Notes. For the economy with ν = 8.0 the cv(h) is kept free and turns out to be 0.09. For all other economies the model
parameters deliver the same 6 statistics.




economy to the same statistics from data as before. In this new economy, households are allowed
to borrow an amount equivalent to the average annual income of the economy.28
    Table 8 presents the parameter values for this economy together with the ones for the bench-
mark case (model E0 ). The first interesting result is that we need higher curvature households
for the borrowing economy to be consistent with the same observed statistics. When households
are allowed to borrow, they have a better financial technology to keep a smooth consumption
profile and thus they are more inclined to work harder when the shock is good and rest when
the productivity is low. Therefore, for the economy to show the low correlation between hours
and wages and the given volatility of hours, we need households to be less willing to substitute,
that is to say, we need higher σ and ν. As Table 8 shows, for the economy where households
are allowed to borrow up to the average per capita income of the economy ν equals 3.459. This
value implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of labor equal to 0.59, almost at the point
estimate in data by Domeij and Flodén (2005).
    Overall, the quantitative effects of borrowing are only minor. The second panel of Table 9
shows that when allowing for borrowing the differences in hours worked between complete and
incomplete markets are slightly smaller, although very similar to the ones for the case with no
borrowing. A way to interpret this is as follows. With the possibility of borrowing households
need to use hours of work as smoothing mechanism to a lesser degree. This implies that for the
model to produce the same amount of hours worked as in data we need to decrease λ, the weight
of leisure in the utility function. Then, in complete markets a lower λ implies a higher amount of
hours worked. Similarly, the productivity gains of market completeness, measured by both labor
efficiency and output per hour worked, barely change.
    Regarding precautionary savings, the second row of Table 10 shows they fall slightly when
we allow for borrowing. Allowing for borrowing preserves the essence of the results: (1) precau-
tionary savings are smaller than measured by a model without labor choice and (2) the increase
in hours worked is in the same order of magnitude as the increase in total savings.
    Finally, Table 11 reports the welfare gains of complete markets. For the borrowing economy
the average of welfare gains over the population is 14.6%, only one and a half percentage points
below what was measured by means of the economy where no borrowing was allowed.


28 Notice that for this parametric experiment we are not taking into consideration that households may prefer not to
work and repudiate the debt and the problems for the existence of a credit market that this would pose.
                           J. Pijoan-Mas / Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (2006) 326–352                              345


Table 9
Aggregate allocations
                               H              L                L/H               Y /H              Y               C
Model E0
 IM economy                    0.33           0.33             1.00              3.50              1.16            0.87
 CM economy                    0.28           0.35             1.24              3.96              1.11            0.87
 IM/CM − 1 (%)                 18.0           −4.7             −19.3             −11.5             4.4             −0.6
Model a = −1.0Y
 IM economy                    0.33           0.33             1.00              3.50              1.16            0.87
 CM economy                    0.29           0.35             1.20              3.87              1.12            0.88
 IM/CM − 1 (%)                 14.0           −4.6             −16.3             −9.5              3.2             −1.1
Model ν = 8.0
 IM economy                    0.33           0.33             1.00              3.50              1.15            0.87
 CM economy                    0.32           0.34             1.08              3.49              1.10            0.86
 IM/CM − 1 (%)                 4.7            −3.0             −7.3              0.4               5.0             0.6
Model HP
 IM economy                    0.33           0.33             1.00              3.50              1.16            0.87
 CM economy                    0.26           0.36             1.39              4.64              1.21            0.94
 IM/CM − 1 (%)                 26.1           −9.2             −28.0             −24.5             −4.7            −7.4


                        Table 10
                        Precautionary savings and precautionary hours (%)
                                                        K                K/L               H
                        Model E0                        18.6             22.4              15.2
                        Model a = −1.0Y                 15.6             19.4              12.3
                        Model ν = 8.0                   17.4             19.9               4.5
                        Model HP                         3.7             12.6              20.7


Table 11
Individual welfare gains (%)
                               Average equivalent variation of consumption
                               all              q1               q2               q3               q4               q5
Model E0                       16.1             11.5             12.5             14.6             16.8             25.2
Model a = −1.0Y                14.6             10.2             11.1             13.0             15.5             23.4
Model ν = 8.0                  11.5              8.2              8.9             10.4             12.2             18.0
Model HP                       15.5             12.1             12.6             14.4             16.2             22.1
Notes. all refers to the average over the whole population. q1 , . . . , q5 refer to the average within the corresponding
quintile.


5.2. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution of labor

   The quantitative results of the paper depend on the households willingness to substitute leisure
and consumption across time and states of the world. This behavior is mainly determined by ν
and σ . The choice of these parameters, therefore, should be guided by households observed be-
havior. The parameter ν is obtained from the observed volatility of hours worked. The parameter
σ drives the correlation between hours and wages.
   However, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of labor implied by the calibrated ν in
the incomplete markets economy, 0.72, is a bit larger than what other authors have typically
